---
permalink: /projects/artifact-3/
title: "Databases"
---

## Project Link
[Artifact 3 Project](https://github.com/wgerraughty/wgerraughty.github.io/tree/master/_projects/fullstack){:target="_blank" .btn .btn--primary}

## Narrative
The final artifact, representing the databases portion of the ePortfolio project, is a full stack application written in Python on top of a MongoDB database. This project was first developed as part of the CS340 course at SNHU, Client/Server Development. The MongoDB database is used to store information on 6,757 different stocks in a market. The application uses a Python driver to connect to the MongoDB database backend, and a web framework using Bottle to route and serve HTTP requests. This allows for HTTP requests, either through a webpage or a curl command, to interact with the database remotely. For this project, the primary usage is through curl commands rather than a webpage.
  
This artifact happens to be one of my sole works featuring databases as it is not something that I have ever used prior to coursework at SNHU. In addition, a full stack application scales well into the other area of databases I covered in my time at SNHU: data mining. Stock information is inherently quantitative, which makes for well-founded conclusions based on data mining efforts. With the enhancement, the application was given the ability to export various sections of the stocks into a CSV format for usage in data mining and statistical applications such as JMP, and an appropriate method to the web framework to serve these requests for exports remotely.

The enhancement for this project deviates quite a bit from what I had planned on doing from Module One. I had originally intended to create an HTML/JavaScript interface to interact with the existing RESTful API, but I was unable to test any work I had done locally due to the way security is handled in modern browsers. While this enhancement walks a different path, I believe it still covers the course outcome CS-499-05 as planned. CS-499-05 covers having a security mindset in the project, which is especially important in work such as databases. By creating a full stack application, there is no direct interaction with the database by end users. The full stack application has users only deal with the front-end, where input can be safely validated in a sandboxed environment, which then sends data on to the backend to process it into commands for the database. JSON is inherently good at this validation, since it does not treat the payloads as executable code. As for authentication, the full stack is capable of using any number of front-end webpages for this purpose based on its RESTful API. The front-end and back-end only interact server-side, so there is less worry about security holes between the API and the database.

In creating this enhancement, I faced a number of issues with the original plan. As more information and testing was done on webpage security with JavaScript especially, modern internet browsers were quick to patch any issues that popped up. Because of this, it became hard to test webpage work on a local machine as these patches sacrificed accessibility for security. As such, creating an HTML/JavaScript front-end wasn’t as feasible as I had hoped. With this in mind I figured the best way to enhance a database project would be to implement some way of exporting data into a format useful for data mining. There is a great number of use cases for data mining, especially considering the database’s purpose is storing information on stocks. Knowing this, I figured the best enhancement would be to make this data easily accessible to most data mining applications by exporting relevant information to the CSV format.
