---
permalink: /
title: "Home"
---

### Projects
If you want to take a look at my projects, check the navigation bar up top.

### About
To learn more about me, check the About page in the navigation bar

## Professional Self-Assessment

My time working through the Computer Science program at SNHU has taught me a great number of skills to bring with me into the professional world. This ePortfolio serves as a representation of my skills in the three areas of Data Structures and Algorithms, Software Engineering, and Databases, but my work during the Computer Science program was not limited to these alone. In addition to these three works, I have been through a number of courses teaching a variety of different topics in Computer Science, and each of them helped me earn the skillset I have today.
One of the most important parts of moving into a career, in my opinion, is being able to work collaboratively with teammates and communicate effectively to both your coworkers and your superiors. To that end, CS310: Collaboration and Team Project prepared me greatly for the different intricacies of accounting for other people’s changes when programming. The course focused on using branching to show how code changes by various people at once can affect the main program and how they can conflict with each other. By seeing how code conflicts happen, we are better able to think ahead and develop with these conflicts in mind to mitigate them in the future.
As for communicating to superiors, CS250: Software Development Life Cycle and IT201: Computer Platform Technologies both prepared me in different ways. IT201 had us act as an IT consultant for a business and asked us to convey our research findings on business needs to several different positions and levels of technical understanding in the company. Being able to explain this information to a peer with a similar technological background shows that you properly understand the needs of the business and the results of the research, while being able to present this to leaders and shareholders who may not have that same background shows you can communicate that information accurately and effectively.
CS250 focused on the Agile software development cycle, which turned out to be an immense help with my first internship and eventual job. This course swapped roles between different parts of a development team from testers to developers to the product owner. Having an understanding of each of the different roles on an Agile team helped a lot with team coordination, but the product owner role specifically helped with delivering information to product stakeholders and customers who may not understand the cost or risk of different features or other desirables.
Data structures and algorithms are some of the fundamental programming concepts, and IT315: Object Oriented Analysis/Design helped put them into visual form. IT315 was less focused on actual programming and more on drafting and planning. Using UML (Unified Modeling Language) diagrams, objects, communications, and integrations could be conveyed visually to represent the structure behind a program.
When thinking of software engineering, one of the courses I remember greatly was CS320: Software Testing, Automation, and QA. CS320 hammered in test-driven development, which went well with the Agile work I had done previously in CS250. Through this course, I learned more about the testing side of the development process and how much good planning can reduce the cost of development.
Databases and security go hand-in-hand, and CS405: Secure Coding along with DAD220: Introduction to SQL prepared me for both. CS405 was heavily centered around debugging programs and understanding common vulnerabilities in software and how to prevent them. DAD220 was an introductory course to SQL, and on top of learning how relational databases work the course also showcased how important it was to understand the logic behind SQL injection attacks on webpages.
Lastly there are my three artifacts, which are the tangible examples of my work throughout the Computer Science program. The enhancements for the three artifacts take the original projects, which were focused solely on one of the three areas of Data Structures and Algorithms, Software Engineering, and Databases, and apply what I have learned from the different areas of Computer Science throughout the program to improve on them. For example, the enhancement for the Software Engineering artifact, Markov Chain project, applies concepts from algorithms, databases, and security to improve its speed and usefulness without compromising safety. These three artifacts are the Markov Chain text generator representing my work in Software Engineering, a MergeSort implementation representing my work in Algorithms and Data Structures, and a full-stack application representing my work in Databases.
